---
title: MinEQ - A minimal equalizer plugin
layout: post
excerpt: mineq equalizer project
comments: false
---
<script defer src="/_vercel/insights/script.js"></script>

## Audio Plugins

Producing artists use a ton of effects and processing to transform and shape their sound. I wanted to take a dive and make one myself - here I wrote some heavily simplified notes.

## JUCE Framework

The JUCE Framework is an open-source framework that provides modules for building the GUI and signal processing functionality of audio plugins in C++. Below I describe some of the interfaces provided in the framework as well as the general workflow of building a simple EQ plugin.

## Creating Audio Parameters

To begin, audio parameters must be created and linked to the GUI. These are parameters that the user should be able to adjust to change how the signal is processed.

- ```AudioProcessorValueTreeState``` - apvts interface
    - This coordinates syncing parameters with knobs on the GUI and variables in the DSP
    - It is public so that the GUI can attach all of its knobs and sliders, buttons, combo boxes, etc. to it
    - since apvts expects us to provide a list of all parameters when it is created - we need a function that will provide that in form of apvts parameterLayout

Our equalizer should allow us to adjust frequency bands and allow us to carve out or boost frequencies. This is probably one of the most used plugins types in music production. It allows for balancing out a mix without complicating the mix with more complex effects such as compression, sidechain, limiting, etc.

- So our equalizer will have 3 bands: low cut, high cut, and peak(parametric)
    - Cut: Controllable Frequency/Slope cutoff
    - Parametric: Controllable Frequency, Gain, Quality (center frequency)

- ```AudioProcessorParameter``` and ```AudioParameterFloat```: parameters with a range of values represented with a slider of some kind
    - We use ```AudioParameterFloat``` to make a slider for LowCut Freq
    - Human Hearing Range is 20hz - 20,000hz
    - So that will define the range for our parameter
    - Skew Factor is what we want the majority of our slider range to cover (e.g. more precise control for the lower range of slider then larger adjustments at higher ranges)
        - If skew factor is less than one, lower end of range will fill more of the slider’s length
        - If skew factor is greater than one the upper end of the range will be expanded
- Three main band parameters (low, high, peak)
- our lowcut parameter will be defined as having a range from 20hz to 20000hz and a default of 20hz - allow us to control low end sound
- our highcut parameter will be defined as having a range from 20hz to 20000hz and a default of 20000hz - allow us to control high end sound
- our peak parameter - allow us to control mid frequencies - default set to 750hz
    - peak gain allows us to control the volume of mid frequencies (gain)