---
title: Understanding Juvenile Delinquency
layout: post
excerpt: PSY211 Final Project
comments: false
---
<script defer src="/_vercel/insights/script.js"></script>

*This blog post is written for PSY211 - The Criminal Mind as a final project*

# Intro

Juvenile delinquency has been a persistent issue throughout the world and has been the subject of many studies to uncover its potential causes and possible solutions. I hope to explore one of the main causes of juvenile delinquency in this post, expand on the numerous solutions that have been proposed in the past, and analyze some of the existing figures and trends we have seen in recent years.

# Context

When looking at juvenile delinquency, we usually want to explore the issues that cause criminal behavior ranging from theft, drug offenses, assault, and murder. Several theories have been proposed and many psychologists believe that it is a combination of those theories that contribute to violent offenses in juveniles - this includes early onset, biological, cognitive, and social theories. It has been widely established that there are correlations between childhood experiences, parental influences, and general childhood events and the eventual perpetration of violent offenses, usually at late adolescence [(Minh et al., 2013)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3863855/). In the end, there is no one direct cause for juvenile delinquency so it is important to take a look at which areas have the greatest impact and assess solutions that target them.

# How different theories are connected

A factor we will be exploring today is the idea of early onset. This factor focuses on behavioral problems that manifest early in childhood and how that is associated with offending behavior later in life. One particular long-term study has examined that violent offenders tend to have been frequent bullies in childhood, with occurrences of violent offenses peaking around early adulthood before it drops off even after considering factors like parent education level and family structure [(Tiiri et al., 2022)](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00787-022-01964-1#Sec9). So, how exactly is childhood bullying linked to violent offenses in juveniles?

* Bullies are more likely to have aggressive behavior and use it to get what they want. This ties into the social learning theory where youth may observe this behavior pattern in other individuals who have used it to obtain a potential reward. This is otherwise known as 'learned aggression' - and this kind of behavior usually peaks in adolescence but can carry well into adulthood [(Liu et al., 2012)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3411865/)
* Poor social skills from children who engage in bullying may make it difficult for them to form positive social relationships. The lack of social support may cause and contribute to their tendency to commit violent offenses or engage in criminal behavior in later teenage years.

Another interesting finding is that victims also experience issues that may result in behavior associated with violent offenses, including social isolation, mental health issues, and drug abuse. One particular study focuses on the effects of bullying on aggressive responses in the context of guns and gun violence and found that there is a pathway relating aggression and bullying in early childhood to gun violence, citing that those who experienced aggression "have accepted violence as a norm and as a way to achieve goals or cope with stresses" [(Nickerson et al., 2019)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8993126/).

# Solutions

When dealing with juvenile delinquencies, the main difficulty is the range of offenses and different causes that must be addressed. Although awareness for bullying has seemingly increased, it is still a significant problem with the presence of online social media - it seems very hard for any child to escape that cycle and become socially isolated. Rather than focusing on juvenile delinquents after they have committed crimes (for example, in interventions such as "Beyond Scared Straight" which has been shown to provoke delinquency rather than prevent [(van der Put et al., 2020)](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7783688/)), the focus should now be on treating the problem at its root. As discussed throughout - an easily preventable occurrence is bullying, which can be reduced by teaching proper communication skills and conflict resolution skills to children.

Reducing symptoms of early behavioral problems can be done by providing support to both victims and bullies. Doing so requires a multi-faceted approach through policy-changes, awareness, and education. 